Draft: icrc rosetta documentation (#2774)
dfinity/portal: docs/developer-docs/defi/rosetta/icrc_rosetta/index.mdx

> # Overview

Reviewer: ```suggestion
---
keywords: [intermediate, rosetta, tutorial]
---

import { MarkdownChipRow } from "/src/components/Chip/MarkdownChipRow";

# Overview
```

> The ICRC Rosetta allows for communication with the ICRC-1 compatible ledgers through the [Rosetta-API standard](https://docs.cloud.coinbase.com/rosetta/docs/welcome). Examples for them are the [ckBTC ledger](https://dashboard.internetcomputer.org/canister/mxzaz-hqaaa-aaaar-qaada-cai) and the [ckETH ledger](https://dashboard.internetcomputer.org/canister/ss2fx-dyaaa-aaaar-qacoq-cai).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<MarkdownChipRow labels={["Intermediate", "Tutorial" ]} />

The ICRC Rosetta implementation allows for communication with the ICRC-1 compatible ledgers through the [Rosetta-API standard](https://docs.cloud.coinbase.com/rosetta/docs/welcome). Examples include the [ckBTC ledger](https://dashboard.internetcomputer.org/canister/mxzaz-hqaaa-aaaar-qaada-cai) and the [ckETH ledger](https://dashboard.internetcomputer.org/canister/ss2fx-dyaaa-aaaar-qacoq-cai).
```

> This guide is split up into the endpoints of the [Data-API](/docs/developer-docs/defi/rosetta/icrc_rosetta/data_api/index.md) and that of the [Construction-API](/docs/developer-docs/defi/rosetta/icrc_rosetta/construction_api/index.md). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This documentation covers the endpoints of the [Data-API](/docs/developer-docs/defi/rosetta/icrc_rosetta/data_api/index.md) and the [Construction-API](/docs/developer-docs/defi/rosetta/icrc_rosetta/construction_api/index.md). 
```

## Set up an ICRC Rosetta node

You can set up a Rosetta API-compliant node for ICRC to interact with the Internet Computer and your ICRC-1 ledger of choice.

> To keep the instructions simple, you can use a Docker image to create the integration with the Rosetta API.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For simplicity, these instructions will describe how to use a Docker image to create the integration with the Rosetta API.
```

You can also build and run the binary using the source code.

> If you don’t already have [Docker](https://docs.docker.com/get-docker/) on your computer, download and install the latest version.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you don’t already have [Docker](https://docs.docker.com/get-docker/) in your environment, download and install the latest version.
```

To set up a ICRC Rosetta node:

### Step 1:  [Install Docker](https://docs.docker.com/get-docker/) and [start the Docker daemon](https://docs.docker.com/config/daemon/).

The Docker daemon (`dockerd`) should automatically start when you reboot your computer. If you start the Docker daemon manually, the instructions vary depending on the local operating system.

> ### Step 2:  Pull the latest `dfinity/ic-icrc-rosetta-api` image from the Docker Hub by running the following command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Step 2:  Pull the latest `dfinity/ic-icrc-rosetta-api` image from the Docker Hub.

Run the following command:
```

``` bash
docker pull dfinity/ic-icrc-rosetta-api
```

> ### Step 3:  Start the integration software by running the following command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Step 3: Start the integration software.

Run the following command:
```

> You will need to know the canister id of the ICRC-1 ledger you are trying to connect to. For example if we wanted to connect the to ckBTC ICRC-1 ledger with the canister id `mxzaz-hqaaa-aaaar-qaada-cai` which is running on mainnet, we would call the following. We also specify a port using `--port` which we then publish through docker. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You will need to know the canister id of the ICRC-1 ledger you are trying to connect to. For example, to connect the to ckBTC ICRC-1 ledger with the canister id `mxzaz-hqaaa-aaaar-qaada-cai` which is running on mainnet, the following call could be used: 
```

``` bash
docker run \
    --interactive \
    --tty \
    --publish 8082:8082 \
    --rm \
    dfinity/ic-icrc-rosetta-api \
    --port 8082 \
    --network-type mainnet \
    --ledger-id mxzaz-hqaaa-aaaar-qaada-cai
```

> The default port if not specified is `8080`. The default network is the testnet. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This call specifies a port using `--port` which is used to publish through Docker. 
The default port if not specified is `8080`. The default network is the testnet. 
```

This command starts the software on the local host and displays output similar to the following:

    2024-04-11T08:03:55.720213Z  INFO rs/rosetta-api/icrc1/rosetta/src/main.rs:403: Starting Rosetta server
    ⠖ [00:02:10] [#############################>-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------] (628.8s) 

> For further help on what the options for ICRC-Rosetta are you can run.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For further help on what the options for ICRC-Rosetta are, you can run the following command:
```

``` bash
docker run \
    --interactive \
    --tty \
    --publish 8082:8082 \
    --rm \
    dfinity/ic-icrc-rosetta-api \
    --help
```

> By default, the software connects to a testnet.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> It **does not** connect to any ICRC-1 ledger canister running on the Internet Computer blockchain mainnet.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, this software **does not** connect to any ICRC-1 ledger canister running on the Internet Computer blockchain mainnet.
```

Currently, there is no ICRC-1 ledger running on the testnet. However, there are several test tokens running on mainnet such as ckTestBTC (`mc6ru-gyaaa-aaaar-qaaaq-cai`) and ckTestETH (`apia6-jaaaa-aaaar-qabma-cai`). 

:::info
The first time you run the command, it might take some time for the node to catch up to the current link of the chain.
When the node is caught up, you should see output similar to the following:

    Synced Up to block height: 1357644

> After that ICRC Rosetta will update the account balances. Please wait for any queries that include fetching account balances until this process is done. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After that, ICRC Rosetta will update the account balances. Please wait for any queries that include fetching account balances until this process is done. 
```

> The corresponding message you will see is. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The corresponding message you will see is:
```

For more information about Docker command-line options, see the [Docker reference documentation](https://docs.docker.com/engine/reference/commandline/run/).

### Requirements and limitations

The integration software provided in the Docker image has one requirement that is not part of the standard Rosetta API specification.

For transactions involving ICRC-1 tokens, the unsigned transaction must be created less than 24 hours before the network receives the signed transaction.
The reason is that each transaction's `created_at` field refers to an existing transaction (essentially `last_index` available locally at the time of transaction creation). More on this topic can be read on the section on [deduplication](https://github.com/dfinity/ICRC-1/blob/main/standards/ICRC-1/README.md#transaction_deduplication).
Any submitted transaction that refers back to a too old transaction is rejected to maintain operational efficiency.

Other than this requirement, the Rosetta API integration software fully complies with all standard Rosetta endpoints and passes all of the `rosetta-cli` tests.
The software can accept any valid Rosetta request.

> However, the integration software only prompts for transactions to be signed using Ed25519 and SECP256k1, rather than all the signature schemes [listed here](https://www.rosetta-api.org/docs/models/SignatureType.html#values), and only replies with a small subset of the potential responses that the specification supports.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, the integration software only prompts for transactions to be signed using Ed25519 and SECP256k1, rather than all the [signature schemes listed](https://www.rosetta-api.org/docs/models/SignatureType.html#values), and only replies with a small subset of the potential responses that the specification supports.
```

The second part is more complex. To allow users to sign transactions offline and send them back to Rosetta there are a few interactions that the user will have to follow with the Rosetta node. This part is called the flow of operations in the Construction-API. [View an example of how to go through such a flow of operations](/docs/developer-docs/defi/rosetta/icp_rosetta/construction_api/index.md). Although the example in this section corresponds to the ICP Rosetta, the flow of operations also applies to the ICRC Rosetta. The detailed commands for ICRC Rosetta will be discussed in this guide, but it is of benefit to the reader to first get familiar with the flow of operations. 

# Frequently asked questions
The following questions come from the most commonly reported questions and blockers from the developer community regarding Rosetta integration with the Internet Computer.

### The Rosetta node

- #### How do I connect the Rosetta node to the mainnet?
Use flags `--network-type mainnet`

> - #### How do I know if the node has caught up with the test net?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- #### How do I know if the node has caught up with the testnet?
```

Search the `Starting Rosetta API server` startup log. There will be a log entry that says `Synced Up to block height: XX`.
This message confirms that you are caught up with all blocks.

- #### How to persist synced blocks data?
Mount the `/data` directory as a [volume](https://docs.docker.com/storage/volumes/).

```bash
docker volume create rosetta
```
```bash
docker run \
    --volume rosetta:/data \
    --interactive \
    --tty \
    --publish 8080:8080 \
    --rm \
   dfinity/ic-icrc-rosetta-api \
    --network-type mainnet \
    --ledger-id mxzaz-hqaaa-aaaar-qaada-cai
```

- #### Is the Rosetta node versioned?
Yes, new versions are regularly published on [DockerHub](https://hub.docker.com/r/dfinity/ic-icrc-rosetta-api/tags).
It is recommended to use a specific version in production settings, e.g., `dfinity/ic-icrc-rosetta-api:v1.0.0`

> You can query the version of a running rosetta node using the `/network/options` endpoint.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can query the version of a running Rosetta node using the `/network/options` endpoint.
```
